Adds the second chapter (Unit Testing) (#12)
ImperialCollegeLondon/unit_testing_Cpp: _episodes/l2_02_basic_unit_testing.md

---
title: "Introduction to Unit Testing using GoogleTest"
teaching: TBC
exercises: TBC
questions:
- "What framework/libraries can be used for unit testing in C++?"
- "What is GoogleTest?"
- "How to write unit tests with GoogleTest?"
objectives:
- "Understand the basic components of a unit test"
- "Understand how to write a unit test using GoogleTest"
- "Understand how to compile and run the tests"
- "Understand some of the macros available in GoogleTest"

> keypoints:

Reviewer: I made a comment about this previously, but I think it was maybe lost.

I'd write these points as a series of facts that the student should know, as @dalonsoa did for the previous section: https://github.com/ImperialCollegeLondon/unit_testing_Cpp/blob/25e9189d315ce79a2ab2870fb6611a4b84f2d7b7/_episodes/l1-01-introduction.md?plain=1#L15

That said, it's an extremely minor point and this is totally fine -- especially for a first draft.

Author: I think I tried to address your concerns after reading your initial comments. It seems that I did not do well to satisfy you. I am not sure what exactly you want. 

You can suggest a text and I am happy to accept the same.

Reviewer: Oh it looks like you've changed it now. Sorry, I must have been looking at an old version.

- "We learnt about some of the popular testing frameworks for C++."
- "We learnt the baiscs of GoogleTest."
- "We learnt how to use GoogleTest to write our tests."
- "We learnt about anatomy of a unit tests." 
- "We learnt how to write effective unit tests."
- "Finally, we saw an example to demonstrate the above concepts."
---

## 1. Popular frameworks for testing in C++

> In C++, a framework refers to a pre-defined software structure or set of libraries that provides a foundation for developing applications or solving specific types of problems. It typically includes a collection of reusable code, tools, and guidelines that help developers build applications more efficiently. There can be different types of framewokrs in C++ which include:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In C++, a framework refers to a pre-defined software structure or set of libraries that provides a foundation for developing applications or solving specific types of problems. It typically includes a collection of reusable code, tools, and guidelines that help developers build applications more efficiently. There can be different types of frameworks in C++ which include:
```

1. Application Framework
2. Web Framework
3. Game Development Framework

> 4. Testing Framework

Reviewer: On second reading, I'm not sure we need to explain what a framework is. Yes, it is being used with a somewhat technical meaning here, but I think it's pretty obvious from the context.

I think the reader would understand fine if you just jumped straight into explaining what a testing framework is.

Author: @alexdewar I did not introduce as it should have been obvious. It was @dalonsoa suggestion and then I added it.

Reviewer: @dalonsoa Not sure we need this... Even with not knowing the technical meaning of framework, I think it would be easy to follow. What do you reckon?

Reviewer 3: I am not sure what I said - cannot find the original comment - but I agree that, seeing it in writing, it seems unnecessary. I think that starting straight into the next paragraph makes more sense. Sorry for the extra work.

Author: Resolved in 9872529e65183b3cf8fe16120bf43ef5f4658a72

Testing frameworks help in writing and executing tests for code validation and quality assurance. They provide structures and tools for creating test cases, running tests, and generating reports. There are a number of popular frameworks that can be used for testing in C++. A few of them are mentioned below:-

- [GoogleTest](https://google.github.io/googletest/)
- [Boost.Test](https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_82_0/libs/test/doc/html/index.html)
- [CppUtest](http://cpputest.github.io/)
- [Catch2](https://github.com/catchorg/Catch2)
- [UT++](https://boost-ext.github.io/ut/)
- [doctest](https://github.com/doctest/doctest)
- [CTest](https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/manual/ctest.1.html)

> In this course, we will use GoogleTest, as it is popular and easy to use, though the concepts are the same as for other testing frameworks..

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this course, we will use GoogleTest, as it is popular and easy to use, though the concepts are the same as for other testing frameworks.
```

> ## 2. A brief about GoogleTest

Reviewer: A brief what?

How about:

```suggestion
## 2. A brief introduction to GoogleTest
```

> Simply defined, GoogleTest is a testing framework developed by Google's testing technology team to develop and write C++ tests. GoogleTest offers multiple advantages over other frameworks:-

Reviewer: I think the first sentence is redundant.

Author: I took this line from https://google.github.io/googletest/primer.html. The developers themselves started introduction with this line. It think, it should be fine.

Reviewer: It is definitely fine for now, but could perhaps be a bit punchier. I think most readers could guess that GoogleTest is a testing framework developed by Google.

Reviewer 3: This looks ok to me. Sure, it is kind of obvious it has been developed by Google, but I don't think it is a big deal.

> Simply defining, GoogleTest is a testing framework developed by Google's testing technology team to develop and write C++ tests.  GoogleTest offers multiple advantages over other frameworks:-

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Simply defined, GoogleTest is a testing framework developed by Google's testing technology team to develop and write C++ tests. GoogleTest offers multiple advantages over other frameworks:-
```

2. **Large and Active Community**: GoogleTest has a large and active community of developers. This means that there is ample support available in terms of documentation, tutorials, forums, and online resources. 
3. **Mature and Stable**: It is a mature and stable framework that has been used extensively in industry projects and open-source software. 
4. **Wide Platform Support**: GoogleTest supports multiple platforms, including Windows, Linux, macOS, and various compilers. It is compatible with popular development environments and build systems, making it suitable for a wide range of C++ projects.
5. **Flexible and Extensible**: GoogleTest provides flexibility in test organization and customization. It allows you to structure your tests using test cases and test suites. You can also define custom test fixtures and customise test execution and reporting. Additionally, GoogleTest can be extended with custom assertion macros and utilities to suit your specific testing needs.

> ## 3. Writing Unit test using GoogleTest

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## 3. Writing unit tests using GoogleTest
```

For this episode, we will consider the same example `fibonacci.cpp` that we used previously. There we identified 3 possible cases when using the `recursive_fibonacci` function for which we wrote some manual tests:

> - `n` equal to 0 or 1
> - `n` a negative number
> - `n` a positive number greater than 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `n` is equal to 0 or 1
- `n` is a negative number
- `n` is a positive number greater than 1
```

> To demonstrate how to use GoogleTest, we will simply be converting these tests that we wrote manually in the same file using GoogleTest framework. Section 5 below will describe the anatomy of a test, but first lets see how they look like in the practical case.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To demonstrate how to use GoogleTest, we will simply be converting these tests that we wrote manually in the same file using GoogleTest framework. Section 5 below will describe the anatomy of a test, but first let's see what they look like in the practical case.
```

For using GoogleTest in your code, you need to follow the following steps in general.

### 3.1. Adding the required header files

> The first step would be to add the required header files in your program. For GoogleTest, you would need to add the following line in your code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first step is to add the required header files in your program. For GoogleTest, you need to add the following line to your code:
```

```cpp
#include "gtest/gtest.h"
```

### 3.2. Create your tests

> The next step would be to to define your test. GoogleTest uses the following convention in naming various tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next step is to define your test. GoogleTest uses the following convention in naming various tests:
```

```cpp
TEST(TestSuiteName, TestName)
{
    // Test logic and assertions
}
```

> The different parts in the above cell have the following meaning

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The different parts in the above cell have the following meanings:
```

> - `TEST`: This is the macro (For more details about macroq, click [Macros in C++](https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/cpp/Macros.html)) provided by the GoogleTest framework to define a test case.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `TEST`: This is the macro provided by the GoogleTest framework to define a test case. (For more details about macros, see [Macros in C++](https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/cpp/Macros.html))
```

> - `TestSuiteName`: It is the name of the test suite or test fixture. It groups related tests together. It should be a valid C++ identifier.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `TestSuiteName`: This is the name of the test suite or test fixture. It groups related tests together. It should be a valid C++ identifier.
```

> - `TestName`: It is the name of the individual test case within the test suite. It should also be a valid C++ identifier.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `TestName`: This is the name of the individual test case within the test suite. It should also be a valid C++ identifier.
```

- `Test logic and assertions`: This is the body of the test case where you write the actual test code, including any necessary assertions to verify the expected behaviour. The section `Test Assertions` describes more about various assertions available in GoogleTest.

> ### 3.3. Initialise GoogleTest framework in your main

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 3.3. Initialise GoogleTest framework in your main function
```

> ### 3.3. Initialise GoogleTest framework in your main function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 3.3. Initialise GoogleTest in your main function
```

> When you install GoogleTest you would get two libraries namely `libgtest.a` and `libgtest_main.a` (The extension `.a` means it is a static library and is applicable for Linux based system) . The first one i.e. `libgtest.a` is the library which provides all the necessary testing features such as assertions, test discovery, collection of results etc. The second library i.e. `libgtest_main.a` provides a main function so that you do not need to write your own main function for testing. For more details, refer to https://stackoverflow.com/questions/6457856/whats-the-difference-between-gtest-lib-and-gtest-main-lib.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you install GoogleTest you would get two libraries namely `libgtest.a` and `libgtest_main.a` (The extension `.a` means it is a static library and is applicable for Linux based systems). The first one, i.e. `libgtest.a`, is the library which provides all the necessary testing features such as assertions, test discovery, collection of results etc. The second library, i.e. `libgtest_main.a`, provides a main function so that you do not need to write your own main function for testing. For more details, refer to https://stackoverflow.com/questions/6457856/whats-the-difference-between-gtest-lib-and-gtest-main-lib.  
```

> When you install GoogleTest you would get two libraries namely `libgtest.a` and `libgtest_main.a` (The extension `.a` means it is a static library and is applicable for Linux based systems). The first one, i.e. `libgtest.a`, is the library which provides all the necessary testing features such as assertions, test discovery, collection of results etc. The second library, i.e. `libgtest_main.a`, provides a main function so that you do not need to write your own main function for testing. For more details, refer to https://stackoverflow.com/questions/6457856/whats-the-difference-between-gtest-lib-and-gtest-main-lib.  

Reviewer: I wouldn't have a "naked" link in the text. Give it a text description.

Also, it would be better if you could link to the GoogleTest documentation, but this is also fine.

Author: resolved in aa1a24a83286f710250741a56e9d87b00d10969f

> For this sub-section, we are assuming that you are writing your own main function while the next section describes how to  run your tests without your own main function by linking to the main function provided in `lgtest_main`. You would need to include the following lines in your main function as shown below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this sub-section, we are assuming that you are writing your own main function, while the next section describes how to run your tests without your own main function by linking to the main function provided in `lgtest_main`. You will need to include the following lines in your main function:
```

```cpp
int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
    // Initialise GoogleTest Framework
    testing::InitGoogleTest(&argc, argv);
    
    // Instruction to Run the test cases.
    return RUN_ALL_TESTS();
}
```

> The `RUN_ALL_TESTS()` is typically called from `main` and when it is invoked, it scans the program for all the test cases and test methods defined using the `test` macro. It then executes each test case and captures the results of each individual test method within the test case. After running all the tests, it provides a summary of the test results, including the number of tests run, passed, and failed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`RUN_ALL_TESTS()` is typically called from `main` and when it is invoked, it scans the program for all the test cases and test methods defined using the `TEST` macro. It then executes each test case and captures the results of each individual test method within the test case. After running all the tests, it provides a summary of the test results, including the number of tests run, passed, and failed.
```

> The `RUN_ALL_TESTS()` is typically called from `main` and when it is invoked, it scans the program for all the test cases and  test methods defined using the `test` macro. It then executes each test case and captures the results of each individual test method within the test case. After running all the tests, it provides a summary of the test results, including the number of tests run, passed, and failed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `RUN_ALL_TESTS()` is typically called from `main` and when it is invoked, it scans the program for all the test cases and test methods defined using the `test` macro. It then executes each test case and captures the results of each individual test method within the test case. After running all the tests, it provides a summary of the test results, including the number of tests run, passed, and failed.
```

### 3.4. Compile and run your program

In order to compile your program and link with the required libraries, you can use the following instruction as a template. Please remember to modify the paths according to your system and location of the files.

```bash
# For compiling and linking, please use the instruction below
$ g++ your_code.cpp -I path_to_your_gtest.h -L path_to_your_lgtest.a -lgtest -lpthread -o your_executable_name
 
# Run your code  
$ ./your_executable_name
```

In the above cell, `lpthread` refers to `pthread` library which is an acronym for "POSIX Threads". It is a library in C and C++ that provides an interface for creating and managing threads in a multi-threaded program. It is based on the POSIX (Portable Operating System Interface) standard for thread management. 

> Although, we are not using any multi-threaded feature explicity in this course, we still need to link the progam with this library. This is because some of the function described in `lgtest` depends on `lpthread` and without it, linker will give an error. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although, we are not using any multi-threaded feature explicity in this course, we still need to link the progam with this library. This is because some of the function described in `lgtest` depends on `lpthread` and without it the linker will give an error. 
```

```bash
$ g++ your_code.cpp -I path_to_your_gtest.h -L path_to_your_lgtest.a -lgtest_main -lgtest -lpthread -o your_executable_name
```
## 4. Test Assertions in GoogleTest

[Assertions in C++](https://cplusplus.com/reference/cassert/assert/) are statements used to validate assumptions or conditions during program execution. They are primarily used for debugging and testing purposes to check if certain conditions are true. Assertions help detect programming errors and provide a mechanism to halt the program's execution or display an error message when a condition is not satisfied.

GoogleTest offers many types of assertions as described in [GoogleTest Assertions](http://google.github.io/googletest/reference/assertions.html). A few of them are described below as they will be used in our upcoming sections/chapters.

1. **Equality Assertions**: Equality assertions are used to compare values for equality. The most commonly used assertion is `ASSERT_EQ(expected, actual)`, which verifies that the `expected` and `actual` values are equal. For example:

```cpp
ASSERT_EQ(expected_value, your_function(function_arguments));  

> // Verify that the expexted value is equal to the value returned by your function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// Verify that the expected value is equal to the value returned by your function.
```

```cpp
ASSERT_THROW(throwException(), std::runtime_error);  // Verify that throwException() throws a std::runtime_error
```

4. **String Assertions**: String assertions are used to compare string values. GoogleTest provides various string assertions, such as `ASSERT_STREQ`, `ASSERT_STRNE`, `ASSERT_STRCASEEQ`, and `ASSERT_STRCASENE`. These assertions allow you to compare strings for equality, inequality, or case-insensitive equality.

```cpp
ASSERT_STREQ("Hello", getString());  // Verify that getString() returns the exact string "Hello"
ASSERT_STRCASEEQ("hello", getString());  // Verify that getString() returns "hello" in a case-insensitive manner
```

The majority of the macros listed above come as a pair with an `EXPECT_` variant and an `ASSERT_` variant. Upon failure, `EXPECT_` macros generate nonfatal failures and allow the current function to continue running, while `ASSERT_` macros generate fatal failures and abort the current function.

All assertion macros support streaming a custom failure message into them with the `<<` operator, for example:

```cpp
EXPECT_TRUE(my_condition) << "My condition is not true";
```

## 5. Anatomy of a Unit Test

> A Unit test in general follows a three step structure as mentioned below:-

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A unit test in general follows a three step structure:
```

   b. `validateEmail_WithInvalidFormat_ShouldReturnFalse`

2. **Consistent Formatting**: Consistency in naming conventions helps maintain a uniform and predictable test suite. Choose a naming style and stick to it throughout your test methods. Some common conventions include using **CamelCase** or **underscore-separated** words. Additionally, consider using a prefix like `test_` or a suffix like `should` to distinguish test methods from regular code.

3. **Single Responsibility**: Each test method should focus on testing a single aspect or behaviour of the unit under test. Avoid testing multiple scenarios within a single test method, as it can make the test less readable and harder to diagnose when failures occur. Instead, break down complex scenarios into multiple smaller tests, each targeting a specific case or condition.

4. **Test Data Organization**: Separate the test data from the test methods. Consider using dedicated variables or data structures to store test data. This allows for better readability and maintainability, as changes to the test data can be easily managed without modifying the test methods themselves.

## 7. Unit Test for the Fibonacci Sequence

> With the above guidelines in mind, we can write some of the unit tests for our `Fibonacci.cpp` that we learnt in Chapter 1. The complete code is given below and can be found in [Chapter2](../code/Chapter2/Fibonacci_test.cpp).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the above guidelines in mind, we can write some of the unit tests for our `fibonacci.cpp` that we learnt in Chapter 1. The complete code is given below and can be found in [Chapter2](../code/Chapter2/fibonacci_test.cpp).
```

    } else {
        return recursive_fibonacci(n - 1) + recursive_fibonacci(n - 2);
    }
}

TEST(FibonacciTest, HandlesZeroInput) {
    EXPECT_EQ(recursive_fibonacci(0), 0);
}

TEST(FibonacciTest, HandlesValueOneAsInput) {
    EXPECT_EQ(recursive_fibonacci(1), 1);
}

TEST(FibonacciTest, HandlesPositiveInput) {
    EXPECT_EQ(recursive_fibonacci(5), 5);
}

int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
    testing::InitGoogleTest(&argc, argv);
    return RUN_ALL_TESTS();
}
```

On compiling and running above program, we get the following output.

```bash
[==========] Running 3 tests from 1 test suite.
[----------] Global test environment set-up.
[----------] 3 tests from FibonacciTest
[ RUN      ] FibonacciTest.HandlesZeroInput
[       OK ] FibonacciTest.HandlesZeroInput (0 ms)
[ RUN      ] FibonacciTest.HandlesValueOneAsInput
[       OK ] FibonacciTest.HandlesValueOneAsInput (0 ms)
[ RUN      ] FibonacciTest.HandlesPositiveInput
[       OK ] FibonacciTest.HandlesPositiveInput (0 ms)
[----------] 3 tests from FibonacciTest (0 ms total)

[----------] Global test environment tear-down
[==========] 3 tests from 1 test suite ran. (0 ms total)
[  PASSED  ] 3 tests.
```
### 7.1 Exercise

> Modify the above program to throw an exception for the negative values and write a test for the same.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Modify the above program to throw an exception for negative values and write a test for this.
```

**Solution**

> Add the following lines in your code. Full solution given in [Solution](../code/Chapter2/Exercise_solution).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add the following lines in your code. The full solution is given in [Solution](../code/Chapter2/Exercise_solution).
```

> ### 7.1 Exercise
> 
> Modify the above program to throw an exception for negative values and write a test for this.
> 
> **Solution**
> 
> Add the following lines in your code. The full solution is given in [Solution](../code/Chapter2/Exercise_solution).
> 
> ```cpp
> // Change the function as shown below.
> int recursive_fibonacci(int n)
> {
>     if(n < 0)
>         throw std::invalid_argument("Input must be a non-negative number");
>     else if (n <= 1) {
>         return n;
>     } else {
>         return recursive_fibonacci(n - 1) + recursive_fibonacci(n - 2);
>     }
> }
> 
> // Add the required test.
> TEST(FibonacciTest, ThrowsExceptionNegativeInput) {
>     EXPECT_THROW(recursive_fibonacci(-3), std::invalid_argument);
> }
> ```

Reviewer 3: This needs to be formatted as a challenge with a solution inside, so it is rendered correctly in GitHub pages:

```suggestion
> ## Exercise: Test for negative values
> 
> Modify the above program to throw an exception for negative values and write a test for this.
>
> > ## Solution
> > 
> > Add the following lines in your code. The full solution is given in [Solution](../code/Chapter2/Exercise_solution).
> > 
> > ```cpp
> > // Change the function as shown below.
> > int recursive_fibonacci(int n)
> > {
> >     if(n < 0)
> >         throw std::invalid_argument("Input must be a non-negative number");
> >     else if (n <= 1) {
> >         return n;
> >     } else {
> >         return recursive_fibonacci(n - 1) + recursive_fibonacci(n - 2);
> >     }
> > }
> > 
> > // Add the required test.
> > TEST(FibonacciTest, ThrowsExceptionNegativeInput) {
> >     EXPECT_THROW(recursive_fibonacci(-3), std::invalid_argument);
> > }
> > ```
> >
> {: .solution}
>
{: .challenge}
```

---
title: "Introduction to Unit Testing using GoogleTest"
teaching: TBC
exercises: TBC
questions:
- "What framework/libraries can be used for unit testing in C++?"
- "What is GoogleTest?"

> - "How to write unit tests with GoogleTest?"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- "How can I write and run unit tests with GoogleTest?"
```

- "Finally, we saw an example to demonstrate the above concepts."
---

## 1. Popular frameworks for testing in C++

Testing frameworks help in writing and executing tests for code validation and quality assurance. They provide structures and tools for creating test cases, running tests, and generating reports. There are a number of popular frameworks that can be used for testing in C++. A few of them are mentioned below:-

- [GoogleTest](https://google.github.io/googletest/)
- [Boost.Test](https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_82_0/libs/test/doc/html/index.html)
- [CppUtest](http://cpputest.github.io/)
- [Catch2](https://github.com/catchorg/Catch2)
- [UT++](https://boost-ext.github.io/ut/)
- [doctest](https://github.com/doctest/doctest)
- [CTest](https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/manual/ctest.1.html)

In this course, we will use GoogleTest, as it is popular and easy to use, though the concepts are the same as for other testing frameworks.

## 2. A brief introduction to GoogleTest

Simply defined, GoogleTest is a testing framework developed by Google's testing technology team to develop and write C++ tests. GoogleTest offers multiple advantages over other frameworks:-

> 1. **Comprehensive Features**: GoogleTest provides a rich set of features, including a wide range of assertion macros, test fixtures, parameterized tests, test discovery, test filtering, and powerful mocking capabilities. It offers a complete testing framework that can handle various testing scenarios.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Comprehensive Features**: GoogleTest provides a rich set of features, including a wide range of assertion macros, test fixtures, parameterised tests, test discovery, test filtering, and powerful mocking capabilities. It offers a complete testing framework that can handle various testing scenarios.
```

2. **Large and Active Community**: GoogleTest has a large and active community of developers. This means that there is ample support available in terms of documentation, tutorials, forums, and online resources. 
3. **Mature and Stable**: It is a mature and stable framework that has been used extensively in industry projects and open-source software.
4. **Wide Platform Support**: GoogleTest supports multiple platforms, including Windows, Linux, macOS, and various compilers. It is compatible with popular development environments and build systems, making it suitable for a wide range of C++ projects.
5. **Flexible and Extensible**: GoogleTest provides flexibility in test organization and customization. It allows you to structure your tests using test cases and test suites. You can also define custom test fixtures and customise test execution and reporting. Additionally, GoogleTest can be extended with custom assertion macros and utilities to suit your specific testing needs.

## 3. Writing unit tests using GoogleTest

> For this episode, we will consider the same example `fibonacci.cpp` that we used previously. There we identified 3 possible cases when using the `recursive_fibonacci` function for which we wrote some manual tests:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this episode, we will consider the same example `fibonacci.cpp` that we used previously. There we identified 3 possible cases when using the `recursive_fibonacci` function for which we wrote some manual tests for when:
```

- `TestName`: This is the name of the individual test case within the test suite. It should also be a valid C++ identifier.
- `Test logic and assertions`: This is the body of the test case where you write the actual test code, including any necessary assertions to verify the expected behaviour. The section `Test Assertions` describes more about various assertions available in GoogleTest.

### 3.3. Initialise GoogleTest in your main function

When you install GoogleTest you would get two libraries namely `libgtest.a` and `libgtest_main.a` (The extension `.a` means it is a static library and is applicable for Linux based systems). The first one, i.e. `libgtest.a`, is the library which provides all the necessary testing features such as assertions, test discovery, collection of results etc. The second library, i.e. `libgtest_main.a`, provides a main function so that you do not need to write your own main function for testing. For more details, refer to [Difference between libgtest and libgtest-main](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/6457856/whats-the-difference-between-gtest-lib-and-gtest-main-lib).  

> For this sub-section, we are assuming that you are writing your own main function, while the next section describes how to run your tests without your own main function by linking to the main function provided in `lgtest_main`. You will need to include the following lines in your main function:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this sub-section, we are assuming that you are writing your own main function, while the next section describes how to run your tests without your own main function by linking to the main function provided in `lgtest_main`. You will need to use the following as your main function:
```

## 7. Unit Test for the Fibonacci Sequence

With the above guidelines in mind, we can write some of the unit tests for our `fibonacci.cpp` that we learnt in Chapter 1. The complete code is given below and can be found in [Chapter2](../code/Chapter2/Fibonacci_test.cpp).

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include "gtest/gtest.h"

/*Returns the n'th term of the Fibonacci sequence.*/
int recursive_fibonacci(int n)
{
    if (n <= 1) {
        return n;
    } else {
        return recursive_fibonacci(n - 1) + recursive_fibonacci(n - 2);
    }
}

TEST(FibonacciTest, HandlesZeroInput) {
    EXPECT_EQ(recursive_fibonacci(0), 0);
}

TEST(FibonacciTest, HandlesValueOneAsInput) {
    EXPECT_EQ(recursive_fibonacci(1), 1);
}

TEST(FibonacciTest, HandlesPositiveInput) {
    EXPECT_EQ(recursive_fibonacci(5), 5);
}

int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
    testing::InitGoogleTest(&argc, argv);
    return RUN_ALL_TESTS();
}
```

On compiling and running above program, we get the following output.

> ```bash
> [==========] Running 3 tests from 1 test suite.
> [----------] Global test environment set-up.
> [----------] 3 tests from FibonacciTest
> [ RUN      ] FibonacciTest.HandlesZeroInput
> [       OK ] FibonacciTest.HandlesZeroInput (0 ms)
> [ RUN      ] FibonacciTest.HandlesValueOneAsInput
> [       OK ] FibonacciTest.HandlesValueOneAsInput (0 ms)
> [ RUN      ] FibonacciTest.HandlesPositiveInput
> [       OK ] FibonacciTest.HandlesPositiveInput (0 ms)
> [----------] 3 tests from FibonacciTest (0 ms total)
> 
> [----------] Global test environment tear-down
> [==========] 3 tests from 1 test suite ran. (0 ms total)
> [  PASSED  ] 3 tests.
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
~~~
[==========] Running 3 tests from 1 test suite.
[----------] Global test environment set-up.
[----------] 3 tests from FibonacciTest
[ RUN      ] FibonacciTest.HandlesZeroInput
[       OK ] FibonacciTest.HandlesZeroInput (0 ms)
[ RUN      ] FibonacciTest.HandlesValueOneAsInput
[       OK ] FibonacciTest.HandlesValueOneAsInput (0 ms)
[ RUN      ] FibonacciTest.HandlesPositiveInput
[       OK ] FibonacciTest.HandlesPositiveInput (0 ms)
[----------] 3 tests from FibonacciTest (0 ms total)

[----------] Global test environment tear-down
[==========] 3 tests from 1 test suite ran. (0 ms total)
[  PASSED  ] 3 tests.
~~~
{: .output}
```

The output is just text, rather than bash code. This should render it as an output cell.

---
title: "Introduction to Unit Testing using GoogleTest"
teaching: TBC
exercises: TBC
questions:
- "What framework/libraries can be used for unit testing in C++?"
- "What is GoogleTest?"
- "How can I write and run unit tests with GoogleTest?"
objectives:
- "Understand the basic components of a unit test"
- "Understand how to write a unit test using GoogleTest"
- "Understand how to compile and run the tests"
- "Understand some of the macros available in GoogleTest"
keypoints:
- "We learnt about some of the popular testing frameworks for C++."
- "We learnt the basics of GoogleTest."
- "We learnt how to use GoogleTest to write our tests."
- "We learnt about anatomy of a unit tests." 
- "We learnt how to write effective unit tests."

> - "Finally, we saw an example to demonstrate the above concepts."

Reviewer 3: I think these can do with a rewriting to follow the structure of take away messages we mentioned in other PRs.

---

> title: "Introduction to Unit Testing using Google Test"

Reviewer: You're a bit inconsistent with the naming of GoogleTest. Maybe just find and replace all with "GoogleTest", which is the way Google write it: https://github.com/google/googletest

Author: Addressed in ccc6027

teaching: TBC
exercises: TBC
questions:
- "What framework/libraries can be used for Unit Testing in C++?"
- "What is Google test library?"

> - "How to write Unit Test using Google test?"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "What framework/libraries can be used for unit testing in C++?"
- "What is GoogleTest?"
- "How to write unit tests with GoogleTest?"
```

objectives:
- "Understand the basic components of a unit test"
- "Understand how to write a unit test using google test library?"
- "Understand how to compile and run the test?"

> - "Understand some of the macros available in google test"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "Understand how to write a unit test using GoogleTests"
- "Understand how to compile and run the tests"
- "Understand some of the macros available in GoogleTest"
```

Author: Resolved in 0392032

keypoints:
- "We learnt about some of the popular testing frameworks for C++."
- "We learnt about Googletest and how to use it to write our tests."
- "We learnt about anatomy of a unit test and how to write effective unit tests."

> - "Finally, we saw an example to demonstrate the above concepts."

Reviewer: I'd write these in the same way @dalonsoa did in the intro, i.e. with each key point being a single fact, e.g. "GoogleTest is a popular and easy-to-use testing framework for C++" or whatever.

Author: Resolved in 0392032

---

## 1. Popular frameworks for testing in C++

> There are a number of popular frameworks that can be used for testing in C++. A few of them are mentioned below:-

Reviewer 3: Maybe describe what is a framework for testing and why they are needed.

Author: Addressed in the commit 0e615fa.

- [GoogleTest](https://google.github.io/googletest/)
- [Boost.Test](https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_82_0/libs/test/doc/html/index.html)
- [CppUtest](http://cpputest.github.io/)
- [Catch2](https://github.com/catchorg/Catch2)
- [UT++](https://boost-ext.github.io/ut/)

> - [doctest](https://github.com/doctest/doctest)

Reviewer: We should also probably mention CTest, as it comes with CMake. (I *think* it's basically its own testing framework, but you can use it to test with GoogleTest etc. too.)

Author: Resolved in 4df784e

> In this course, we will focus mainly on GoogleTest.

Reviewer: We're exclusively using GoogleTest, so I'd reword this a little. I'd also justify the choice, e.g.:

```suggestion
In this course, we will use GoogleTest, as it is popular and easy to use, though the concepts are the same as for other testing frameworks.
```

Author: Resolved in 4df784e

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

## 2. A brief about GoogleTest

> Simply defining, GoogleTest is a testing framework developed by Google's testing technology team to develop and write C++ tests.  GoogleTest offers multiple advantages over other frameworks:-

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure if all these features and advantages that you describe below (specially in 1 and 2) will mean much to people without experience in testing. It might be useful to give a higher level, less technical description here of why we are choosing Google Test and then leave the more detailed, specific features to the section or episode when they are relevant and their value can be correctly appreciated.

Reviewer: I didn't see this section before I made my comment above, but I agree with @dalonsoa. I'd just have at most a sentence or two justifying the choice of GoogleTest in passing, then move on.

Author: Actually, I would like to keep most of the points. 

The points 3 to 6 are quite easy and we will be covering most of the things mentioned in point 1 in the current course. 

Therefore, I am  removing point 2 but keeping point 1. I hope it should be OK.

Addressed in 5f7bad9.

3. **Large and Active Community**: Google Test has a large and active community of developers. This means that there is ample support available in terms of documentation, tutorials, forums, and online resources. 
4. **Mature and Stable**: It is a mature and stable framework that has been used extensively in industry projects and open-source software. 
5. **Wide Platform Support**: Google Test supports multiple platforms, including Windows, Linux, macOS, and various compilers. It is compatible with popular development environments and build systems, making it suitable for a wide range of C++ projects.
6. **Flexible and Extensible**: Google Test provides flexibility in test organization and customization. It allows you to structure your tests using test cases and test suites. You can also define custom test fixtures and customise test execution and reporting. Additionally, Google Test can be extended with custom assertion macros and utilities to suit your specific testing needs.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

## 3. Writing Unit test using GoogleTest

> For this chapter, we will consider the same example `fibonacci.cpp` that we used in the previous chapter. Also, for understanding how to use GoogleTest, we will simply be converting all the tests that we wrote manually in the same file using GoogleTest framework.
> 

Reviewer 3: I think that before diving into the coding there should be a higher level overview of what we are about to do. Something along the lines of:

```suggestion
For this episode, we will consider the same example `fibonacci.cpp` that we used previously. There we identified 3 possible cases when using the `recursive_fibonacci` function for which we wrote some manual tests:

- `n` equal to 0 or 1
- `n` a negative number
- `n` a positive number greater than 1

To demonstrate how to use GoogleTest, we will simply be converting these tests that we wrote manually in the same file using GoogleTest framework. Section 5 below will describe the anatomy of a test, but first lets see how they look like in the practical case.
```

For using GoogleTest in your code, you need to follow the following steps in general.

> 
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

### 3.1. Adding the required header files

> The first step would be to add the required header files in your program. For Googletest, you would need to add the following line in your code.

Reviewer: I think the first step is really to install GoogleTest in some way or other, but I don't think you should add that to the text now. Once I've got a minimal example using CMake we can signpost that for students.

Author: No, that would be a prerequisite. I have no intentions of adding those details here. Usually our courses have some instructions which students have to follow as prerequisites. The installation of gtest would also follow the same.

Reviewer: Ok, fair enough.

```cpp
#include "gtest/gtest.h"
```

> 
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

### 3.2. Create your tests

The next step would be to to define your test. Googletest uses the following convention in naming various tests.

```cpp
TEST(TestSuiteName, TestName)
{
    // Test logic and assertions
}
```

The different parts in the above cell have the following meaning

> - `TEST`: This is the macro provided by the Google Test framework to define a test case.

Reviewer 3: If someone is doing this course, probably they should know already, but maybe define what a macro is (or add a link to where it is explained).

Author: Yes, they should. I have now added a link for macro in commit 62316af.

- `TestSuiteName`: It is the name of the test suite or test fixture. It groups related tests together. It should be a valid C++ identifier.
- `TestName`: It is the name of the individual test case within the test suite. It should also be a valid C++ identifier.
- `Test logic and assertions`: This is the body of the test case where you write the actual test code, including any necessary assertions to verify the expected behaviour. The section `Test Assertions` describes more about various assertions available in GoogleTest.

> 
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

### 3.3. Initialise GoogleTest framework in your main

> For this sub-section, we are assuming that you are writing your own main function (GoogleTest also allows you to run your code without your own main function by linking to a main function provided in `lgest_main`. Please see the next section for more details). You would need to include the following lines in your main function as shown below.

Reviewer 3: The next section explains how to use `lgest_main`, but there is no explanation of where it is coming from. I think this deserves some explanation - or a link to a explanation somewhere else. 

Also, I would remove the parenthesis as that sentence is important.

Author: Addressed in cf42314.

> For this sub-section, we are assuming that you are writing your own main function (GoogleTest also allows you to run your code without your own main function by linking to a main function provided in `lgest_main`. Please see the next section for more details). You would need to include the following lines in your main function as shown below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this sub-section, we are assuming that you are writing your own main function (GoogleTest also allows you to run your code without your own main function by linking to a main function provided in `gtest_main`. Please see the next section for more details). You would need to include the following lines in your main function as shown below.
```

Reviewer: I think we shouldn't *start off* by talking about users writing their own custom `main()` function, because the usual case is just to link against `gtest_main`. We could explain it later under a section called "But what if I want a custom `main()` function?" or something, or we could just mention it in passing.

Author: This is debatable. I learnt the opposite way and I do not see any harm in the current approach either.

Reviewer: I think it would be clearer to just use `gtest_main` at this point and perhaps mention writing a custom `main()` later. But it's up to you.

Author: It is a very small function and I think it is OK to keep it here.

Reviewer: I'm happy to leave as is, so I'll mark this resolved.

```cpp
int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
    // Initialise GoogleTest Framework
    testing::InitGoogleTest(&argc, argv);
    
    // Instruction to Run the test cases.
    return RUN_ALL_TESTS();
}
```

> The `RUN_ALL_TESTS()` is typically called from `main` and when it is invoked, it scans the program for all the test cases and  test methods defined using the `test` macro.   It then executes each test case and captures the results of each individual test method within the test case. After running all the tests, it provides a summary of the test results, including the number of tests run, passed, and failed.
> 
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `RUN_ALL_TESTS()` is typically called from `main` and when it is invoked, it scans the program for all the test cases and  test methods defined using the `test` macro. It then executes each test case and captures the results of each individual test method within the test case. After running all the tests, it provides a summary of the test results, including the number of tests run, passed, and failed.
```

### 3.4. Compile and run your program

In order to compile your program and link with the required libraries, you can use the following instruction as a template. Please remember to modify the paths according to your system and location of the files.

```bash
# For compiling and linking, please use the instruction below

> $ g++ your_code.cpp -I path_to_your_gtest.h -L path_to_your_lgtest.a -lgtest -lpthread -o your_executable_name

Reviewer 3: What is `pthread` and why is it needed?

Reviewer: Not everybody doing the course will be using gcc; if they're on Windows they'll probably use Visual Studio with MSVC. I think we should be opinionated about this and use CMake for everything in this course, because it's the most popular build system and it's cross platform.

That said, I think this is fine for now. Maybe we should just point them at the example project once that's done though?

Author: Addressed in 46974a8.

 
# Run your code  
$ ./your_executable_name
```

> If you do not want to write your main function, you can link against the one provided in the `libgtest_main.a` library by using the following instruction.

Reviewer 3: As mentioned above, we need some context about where this library is coming from.

Author: A brief describe in cf42314

```bash
$ g++ your_code.cpp -I path_to_your_gtest.h -L path_to_your_lgtest.a -lgtest_main -lgtest -lpthread -o your_executable_name
```

> 
> 
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

## 4. Test Assertions in GoogleTest

> Googletest offers many types of assertions as described in [GoogleTest Assertions](http://google.github.io/googletest/reference/assertions.html). A few of them are described below as they will be used in our upcoming sections/chapters.

Reviewer 3: I would describe the purpose of assertions in the context of writing tests.

Author: Addressed in 70ba0e0.

> <br> </br>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> **1. Equality Assertions**: Equality assertions are used to compare values for equality. The most commonly used assertion is `ASSERT_EQ(expected, actual)`, which verifies that the `expected` and `actual` values are equal. For example:

Reviewer 3: For consistency, and to render the list correctly, the number should be outside of the bold marks:
```suggestion
1. **Equality Assertions**: Equality assertions are used to compare values for equality. The most commonly used assertion is `ASSERT_EQ(expected, actual)`, which verifies that the `expected` and `actual` values are equal. For example:
```
And the same in the other points.

Author: It has now been addressed.

```cpp
ASSERT_EQ(expected_value, your_function(function_arguments));  
// Verify that the expexted value is equal to the value returned by your function.

// You can alo change the order if you prefer.
ASSERT_EQ(your_function(function_arguments), expected_value);
```

Other useful equality assertions include `ASSERT_NE`, `ASSERT_LT`, `ASSERT_LE`, `ASSERT_GT`, and `ASSERT_GE` for performing inequality comparisons.

> <br> </br>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

**2. Boolean Assertions**: Boolean assertions are used to verify boolean conditions. For example, `ASSERT_TRUE(condition)` checks that the `condition` is `true`, while `ASSERT_FALSE(condition)` ensures that the `condition` is `false`.

```cpp
ASSERT_TRUE(isValid);  // Verify that the isValid flag is true
ASSERT_FALSE(hasError);  // Verify that the hasError flag is false
```

> 
> <br> </br>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

**3. Exception Assertions**: Exception assertions are used to validate that specific exceptions are thrown during the execution of code. In Google Test, you can use the `ASSERT_THROW(statement, exceptionType)` assertion. For example:

```cpp
ASSERT_THROW(throwException(), std::runtime_error);  // Verify that throwException() throws a std::runtime_error
```

> 
> <br> </br>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

**4. String Assertions**: String assertions are used to compare string values. Google Test provides various string assertions, such as `ASSERT_STREQ`, `ASSERT_STRNE`, `ASSERT_STRCASEEQ`, and `ASSERT_STRCASENE`. These assertions allow you to compare strings for equality, inequality, or case-insensitive equality.

```
ASSERT_STREQ("Hello", getString());  // Verify that getString() returns the exact string "Hello"

> ASSERT_STRCASEEQ("hello", getLowerCaseString());  // Verify that getLowerCaseString() returns "hello" in a case-insensitive manner

Reviewer: I think this example's a bit confused. If you want to test that `getLowerCaseString()` returns the right lowercase string, then you care about the case and should use `ASSERT_STREQ()`.

```suggestion
ASSERT_STREQ("Hello", getString());  // Verify that getString() returns the exact string "Hello"
ASSERT_STRCASEEQ("hello", getString());  // Verify that getString() returns "hello" in a case-insensitive manner
```

Author: You are correct. Thanks for the suggestion.

```

The majority of the macros listed above come as a pair with an `EXPECT_` variant and an `ASSERT_` variant. Upon failure, `EXPECT_` macros generate nonfatal failures and allow the current function to continue running, while `ASSERT_` macros generate fatal failures and abort the current function.

All assertion macros support streaming a custom failure message into them with the `<<` operator, for example:

```cpp
EXPECT_TRUE(my_condition) << "My condition is not true";
```

> 
> <br> </br>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> ## 5. Anatomy of a Unit Test

Reviewer 3: I've mixed feelings about this going after the example or before the example - there are pros and cons in both cases.

Reviewer: As this section delves into the theory in a bit more depth, I think it's ok where it is. We don't want too much theory upfront, I think.

That said, I think we do need a *basic* explanation of what a unit test is before talking about how to work with GoogleTest specifically.

1. **Setup**: In the setup phase, we prepare the necessary preconditions for the unit test. This involves creating any required objects, initialising variables, and setting up the environment to mimic the desired test scenario. The setup step ensures that the unit being tested has the necessary dependencies and context to execute successfully.
2. **Execution**: The execution step involves invoking the unit under test with the specified inputs or parameters. This is the actual execution of the code being tested. The unit is executed with the predetermined inputs, and its output or behavior is observed.
3. **Verification**: In the verification step, we check whether the actual output or behaviour matches the expected result. This typically involves making assertions or comparisons between the observed output and the expected output. If the assertions pass, the test is considered successful. Otherwise, if any assertion fails, it indicates a discrepancy between the expected and actual outcomes, highlighting a potential issue in the unit being tested.

This 3 step structure if often referred as `Arrange-Act-Assert (AAA)` in some textbooks and online resources. 

> 
> <br> </br>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

## 6. Writing Effective Unit Tests

For writing your Unit Tests, it is advisable to follow the guidelines given below.

1. **Clear and Descriptive Names**: Choose meaningful names for your test methods that accurately describe the scenario being tested. A good test method name should clearly convey the input, expected behavior, or outcome being verified. Avoid vague or generic names that don't provide sufficient information about the purpose of the test.

   a. `calculateTotal_WithValidInputs_ShouldReturnCorrectSum`

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

   b. `validateEmail_WithInvalidFormat_ShouldReturnFalse`

> 
>    
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

2. **Consistent Formatting**: Consistency in naming conventions helps maintain a uniform and predictable test suite. Choose a naming style and stick to it throughout your test methods. Some common conventions include using **CamelCase** or **underscore-separated** words. Additionally, consider using a prefix like `test_` or a suffix like `should` to distinguish test methods from regular code.

> 
>    
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

3. **Single Responsibility**: Each test method should focus on testing a single aspect or behaviour of the unit under test. Avoid testing multiple scenarios within a single test method, as it can make the test less readable and harder to diagnose when failures occur. Instead, break down complex scenarios into multiple smaller tests, each targeting a specific case or condition.

> 
>    
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

4. **Test Data Organization**: Separate the test data from the test methods. Consider using dedicated variables or data structures to store test data. This allows for better readability and maintainability, as changes to the test data can be easily managed without modifying the test methods themselves.

> 
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> ## 7. Unit Test for the Fibonacci Sequence

Reviewer: I think this section should come before the theory, actually. The reason is that it's often easier to understand with a concrete examples and we want to make sure the students really understand what a unit test is and what it's for before delving into more abstract topics.

Author: I like to learn things from bottom up rather than top down approach. This is why the elements (to build a test program and its steps) are introduced first and then a full example.

Reviewer: Remember your students may not have the same learning style as you :wink:.

I've personally found it easier when teaching to start off with concrete examples, but it's your call.

Reviewer 3: I agree it might be better before the theory, but let's leave it as it is, for now. This is just the first version and, for sure, we will need to update the course in the future once we have delivered it once of twice and identify what works and what doesn't.

With the above guidelines in mind, we can write some of the unit tests for our `Fibonacci.cpp` that we learnt in Chapter 1. The complete code is given below and can be found in [Chapter2](../code/Chapter2/Fibonacci_test.cpp).

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include "gtest/gtest.h"

/*Returns the n'th term of the Fibonacci sequence.*/
int recursive_fibonacci(int n)
{
if (n <= 1) {
   return n;
} else {
   return recursive_fibonacci(n - 1) + recursive_fibonacci(n - 2);

> }

Reviewer: I'd indent the bodies of your functions in this section.

Author: Resolved in caa0808

}

TEST(FibonacciTest, HandlesZeroInput) {
EXPECT_EQ(recursive_fibonacci(0), 0);
}

TEST(FibonacciTest, HandlesValueOneAsInput) {
EXPECT_EQ(recursive_fibonacci(1), 1);
}

TEST(FibonacciTest, HandlesPositiveInput) {
EXPECT_EQ(recursive_fibonacci(5), 5);
}

> 
> int main(int argc, char **argv)
> {
> testing::InitGoogleTest(&argc, argv);
> return RUN_ALL_TESTS();
> }

Reviewer: Again, I'd drop any mention of custom `main()` functions at this stage:

```suggestion
```

```

On compiling and running above program, we get the following output.

```bash
[==========] Running 3 tests from 1 test suite.
[----------] Global test environment set-up.
[----------] 3 tests from FibonacciTest
[ RUN      ] FibonacciTest.HandlesZeroInput
[       OK ] FibonacciTest.HandlesZeroInput (0 ms)
[ RUN      ] FibonacciTest.HandlesValueOneAsInput
[       OK ] FibonacciTest.HandlesValueOneAsInput (0 ms)
[ RUN      ] FibonacciTest.HandlesPositiveInput
[       OK ] FibonacciTest.HandlesPositiveInput (0 ms)
[----------] 3 tests from FibonacciTest (0 ms total)

[----------] Global test environment tear-down
[==========] 3 tests from 1 test suite ran. (0 ms total)
[  PASSED  ] 3 tests.
```

> 
> 
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

### 7.1 Exercise

Modify the above program to test for the negative values.

**Solution**

Add the following lines in your code.

```cpp
TEST(FibonacciTest, HandlesNegativeInput) {
    EXPECT_EQ(recursive_fibonacci(-3), -3);
}

> ```

Reviewer: I'm not sure about this as an exercise, because the result for putting -3 into the Fibonacci function is undefined. Yes, at the moment our function *will* return a value, but that's a shortcoming of the way its written. The reason for talking about trying to run the function with negative values in the last chapter was to get students to think about edge cases.

A better exercise might be to get the students to modify the function to throw an exception if negative values are input and then test for this.

Author: Resolved in d629e60

> 
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
